# Shifting benthic community composition indirectly alters coral host and endosymbiont physiology through biogeochemical feedback loops #

Journal: _Limnology and Oceanography_

Laurel C Diaz<sup>1*</sup>, Keanu Rochette-Yu Tsuen<sup>2</sup>, Kiran Reed<sup>1</sup>, Craig E Nelson<sup>2</sup>, Nyssa J Silbiger<sup>3</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Department of Biology, California State University, Northridge, CA, USA

<sup>2</sup>Daniel K Inouye Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, Department of Oceanography and Sea Grant College Program, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI, USA

<sup>3</sup>Uehiro Center for the Advancement of Oceanography, Department of Oceanography, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, HI, USA

*Authors for correspondence (laureldiaz12@gmail.com; silbiger@hawaii.edu) 

Abstract: Coral reefs are among the world’s most diverse ecosystems and contribute substantially to ocean productivity and the carbon budget. Disturbances are shifting coral reefs to altered community states, yet how these new communities indirectly alter organismal physiology by modifying the local biogeochemical environment remains largely unknown. We investigated this biogeochemical feedback in a 25-day mesocosm experiment in Mo’orea, French Polynesia, exposing the common coral Porites rus to the biogeochemical environments generated by three distinct communities representative of recent states in this dynamic system (coral-, macroalgae-, and crustose coralline algae (CCA-enriched) relative to a seawater-only control. While net community production (NCP) was similar among communities, net community calcification (NCC) was lowest in the macroalgae-enriched state. Community metabolism drove changes in the organic and inorganic carbon pool, with NCP increasing with both pH and dissolved organic carbon (DOC). These community-driven shifts affected corals at both the community and organismal level: elevated pH significantly enhanced both NCC and chlorophyll a (Chl a) content of the corals. The increase in Chl a cascaded to the holobiont, predicting positive changes in coral tissue biomass, gross photosynthesis, and respiration. This study reveals a critical indirect pathway of disturbance where reef community structure modulates local carbon chemistry, which in turn regulates the physiological performance of key reef-builders. The relationships found in this study highlight a feedback loop that can influence future ecosystem trajectories on coral reefs.

### Contents ###
[Scripts](https://github.com/LDiaz12/material_legacies_indirect_effects/tree/main/Scripts)

[Data](https://github.com/LDiaz12/material_legacies_indirect_effects/tree/main/Data)

[Output](https://github.com/LDiaz12/material_legacies_indirect_effects/tree/main/Output)
* Figures and models used within the publication
